# Standardization Process
## What is the current understanding of the security of Kyber512 (i.e., ML-KEM-512)
Please see NIST's response. [PDF]
## What are NIST’s plans regarding stateful hash-based signatures? (old Q2)
NIST plans to coordinate with other standards organizations, such as the IETF, to develop standards for stateful hash-based signatures. As stateful hash-based signatures do not meet the API requested for signatures, this standardization effort will be a separate process from the one outlined in the call for proposals. It is expected that NIST will only approve a stateful hash-based signature standard for use in a limited range of signature applications, such as code signing, where most implementations will be able to securely deal with the requirement to keep state.

## Is the NIST PQC Standardization Process a competition? (old Q7)
This process shares many features with NIST competitions, and is modelled after the successes we have had with competitions in the past.  There are, however, some important requirements that the current research climate demands we require for this process which constitute significant distinctions between this process and a competition.

First, our handling of the applicants does not coincide with a competition as specified in NISTIR 7977, nor does this process correspond to multiple parallel competitions.  There will not be an appropriate or directly analogous concept of “winners” and “losers.”  Our intention is to select a couple of options for more immediate standardization, as well as to eliminate some submissions as unsuitable. There will likely be some submissions that we do not select for standardization, but that we also do not eliminate and which may be excellent options for a specific application that we're not ready or don't have the contemporaneous resources to standardize.  In such a circumstance, we would communicate with the submitters to allow these to remain under a public license for study and practice and to remain under consideration for future standardization.  There is no specification for the handling of such an applicant in a competition.

## What will happen to a submitted algorithm if some or all of the provided parameters fail to meet their claimed security strength categories? (old Q11)
NIST will not remove a scheme from consideration just because it was submitted with incorrectly analyzed parameters. Depending on how far off the estimate was, and how unanticipated the attack, NIST may take it as a sign the algorithm isn’t mature enough, which could lead NIST to remove the scheme from consideration. However, assessments of an algorithm’s maturity will not be primarily based on security strength categories. Rather, the point of the categories is to compare like with like when doing performance comparisons and to make it easier to plan crypto transitions in the future. NIST will respond to attacks that contradict the claimed security strength category, but do not bring the maturity of the scheme into question, by bumping the parameter set down to a lower category, and potentially encouraging the submitter to provide a higher security parameter set.

## Which security strength categories will NIST consider for standardization? (old Q12)
For any scheme selected for standardization, NIST hopes to select parameters sets from those offered by the submitter. If the submitted parameter sets fail to meet NIST’s needs, for whatever reason, NIST hopes to work with the submitter to provide parameter sets that do meet NIST’s needs. NIST may also choose not to standardize some of the submitted parameter sets. NIST’s reasons for doing this could include insufficient security, unacceptable performance, and too many parameter sets.

NIST has numerous reasons for specifying a categorical post-quantum security hierarchy in the Call for Proposals for post-quantum standards.  The primary purpose is to facilitate the comparison of submissions achieving specific benchmark security levels so that an honest assessment can be made.  Due to the fact that the science is not yet fully developed in this area, it is possible and appropriate for these benchmarks to be refined in response to future advances in theory.  It is not NIST’s intent to unfairly review submissions based on an analysis on parameter sets we learn to be un-impactful.

It is, however, NIST’s present belief that all five of the security strength categories provide sufficient security to allow for standardization. More precisely, NIST would describe security strengths 4 and 5 as “likely excessive,” 2 and 3 as “probably secure for the foreseeable future,” and security strength 1 as “likely secure for the foreseeable future, unless quantum computers improve faster than is anticipated.” The only security considerations which are likely to lead NIST to decline to standardize a parameter set for a scheme NIST has selected are

NIST may assess the parameters as having insufficient security strength for any of the five categories
NIST may assess the parameters as having too little security margin to compensate for the expected uncertainty in attack complexity. And, NIST may decide, based on technological developments during the evaluation process, that one or more of the security strength categories provides insufficient security. As each security category is defined to be at least as secure as an already-standardized, reference primitive, NIST would signal its uncertainty regarding the security of the category by announcing plans to deprecate or withdraw the reference primitive. For example, if NIST were to signal that parameters in category 1 may provide insufficient security, it would do so by announcing plans to deprecate or withdraw AES128. NIST has not done this, and does not expect to do so during the evaluation process.
NIST may also decline to standardize parameters which have unacceptable performance. If NIST feels the higher security strength categories cannot be met with acceptable performance, NIST may encourage the submitter to provide parameters with intermediate security between security strengths 2 and 3, or between 3 and 4.

Finally, NIST may pare down the range of options offered by the submitter, regarding how to select parameters. Flexibility is generally a good thing, but it may be weighed against the complexity of implementing and testing for all available options.

## What are the “standard conversion techniques” NIST will use to convert between public-key encryption schemes and KEMs? (old Q13)
To convert a public key encryption function to a KEM, NIST will construct the encapsulate function by generating a random key and encrypting it. The key generation and decapsulation functions of the KEM will be the same as the key generation and decryption functions of the original public key encryption scheme. To convert a KEM to a public key encryption scheme, NIST will construct the encryption function, by appending to the KEM ciphertext, an AES-GCM ciphertext of the plaintext message, with a randomly generated IV. The AES key will be the symmetric key output by the encapsulate function. (The key generation function will be identical to that for the original KEM, and the decryption function will be constructed by decapsulation followed by AES decryption.)